Unit test guide and catch example (#138)
NUbots/NUbook: src/book/03-guides/04-general/04-writing-tests.mdx

---
section: Guides
chapter: General
title: How to Write Tests
description: Information About Making Tests
slug: /guides/general/writing-tests
---

This guide presents some general information about unit testing and tests in general.

## What is a Unit Test?

> A unit test is a test of a small piece of a codebase - a unit. Unit tests are meant to test only that piece of code and they serve to validate its correctness. This contrasts with integration tests, which tests the interactions of pieces of code and their behaviour together. For the rest of this guide, we'll work with the following toy utility function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A unit test is a test of a small piece of a codebase - a unit. Unit tests should test a single piece of code to validate its correctness. This contrasts with integration tests, which tests the interactions of pieces of code and their behaviour together. For the rest of this guide, we'll work with the following toy utility function
```
Suggested change because I stumbled over the words a bit when reading it.

```cpp

> [[nodiscard]] inline int add(const int a, const int b) noexcept {

Reviewer: 😆 I can't help but wonder if this would confuse some people.

Reviewer 2: Kip and his love of nodiscard inline noexcept 😅

Author: honestly I am torn about this. It adds "needless" complexity, but at the same time I was thinking it should be code that I would actually consider approving. I guess that's maybe a stretch in itself though, because I would not approve a function to add two integers :joy:

    return a + b;
}
```

## Anatomy of a Unit Test

The basic pieces you will need to create a unit test for a function are the following:

1. A set of inputs for the function. These should match the input parameters. In our case, we'll need a set of pairs of integers.

> 2. The associated outputs which you want for each input. These are often referred to as the "ground truth", because they are the true values your function should output. For our `add` example with the pair of inputs (2, 2), we want the output 4, because `add(2, 2) == 4`.

Reviewer 3: Could add something about how we (prefer to) get the ground truth data. Using python scripts with comparable libraries in the case of testing math functions for example.

Author: excellent point. will do

The process of running the tests is as simple as calling the function with your inputs and verifying that the function's output was as expected. In our example, one of the test cases could be running `add(2, 2)` and checking that the result is 4.

## Testing Approach and Philosophy

There are many guidelines you can find online to help you to write good tests. Here are a few:

- Tests should be simple and readable enough to be correct on inspection. You don't want to think about whether a test is correct or not. Ideally you'll be able to read it and know that it's legitimate.
- Make test cases independent. The outcome of one test case shouldn't affect the outcome of others.
- Demonstrate how a piece of code should be used with its tests. We can't google for examples of people using our software, so create examples with your tests.

> - Tests should be deterministic - [seed your randomness](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Random_seed). If you're testing something particularly reliant on randomness or which generates randomness, compensate by using a variety of seeds with many cases each.

Reviewer 3: What would be an example of something reliant on randomness?

Author: thinking of answer on the spot, perhaps an allocator which uses address space layout randomisation? I am not sure. I felt like just saying "which generates randomness" wasn't complete enough, but now that you raise it, I am not sure if there are any valid examples like that.

- Follow the **AAA** structure: Arrange, Act, Assert. Each test should follow the general design of first setting up your input variables (Arrange), calling your unit with those variables (Act), then finally checking your outputs match what they should (Assert).

### General Approach

Write the easy tests first, then think about edge cases and code coverage. For `add`, you might make the `(2, 2) == 4` case first, then `(123000, 456) == 123456`. After you have some simple cases, you could consider throwing in some zeros and negative numbers - cases where the observed behaviour is different somehow.

> Later, you might consider what should happen on integer overflow/wraparound, making sure that errors are handled correctly. At that stage you could also try to make a test case covering every possible branch of your code. The amount of code you execute in a set of tests is referred to as the "code coverage" of the tests.

Reviewer 3: Is it common not to test for this behaviour? I was under the impression that overflow should be tested and handled. At least, the examples i've read online do mention it as an edge case.

> Later, you might consider what should happen on integer overflow/wraparound, making sure that errors are handled correctly. At that stage you could also try to make a test case covering every possible branch of your code. The amount of code you execute in a set of tests is referred to as the "code coverage" of the tests.

Author: Exactly. We don't want to test undefined behaviour - we want to test that our functions avoid the undefined behaviour. So if a function can receive inputs that would cause an underflow, it avoids actually doing it. We can (and should) test that we avoid it.

### Regression Tests

When we find bugs in the codebase and fix them, we should add a test case which makes sure that that code doesn't _regress_ into the buggy behaviour. This test case is called a regression test. Regression tests should be labelled with comments to indicate the behaviour they're watching for. If there is a GitHub issue related to the bug, the comment with the test should reference it. The test should be written such that it would fail before the fix, and pass after the fix.

> For a concrete example, imagine that a bug was found with `add` where if both inputs were negative, it always returned 0. Good practice would be to add a test case or small set of test cases where both inputs were negative - such as `(-1, -1) == -2` and `(-123, -456) == -579` - labelling them as regression tests for that bug. These would clearly fail if the bug came back (although this example is quite contrived, because there should have already been tests with both inputs negative).

Reviewer: I had to google 'contrived'. Either my vocabulary is lacking there or maybe better to use a different word, 'manufactured' maybe?

Reviewer 2: I like contrived, it fits here nicely

Reviewer: I've been overruled 😆 sounds like I need to git gud

> ### Black Box vs White Box Testing

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Black Box vs White Box Testing
```
Not a part of the anatomy :thinking:

Author: It is part of philosophy though :thinking: 
I can change the heading if you like

Reviewer 4: :shrug:

Author: I'll change it :+1:

When we write tests, we can make them completely ignorant to the internals of the code. Such a test worries only about the inputs and outputs, considering the parts in the middle as a black box which we can't see inside - black box testing.

White box testing looks at the internals and makes tests which depend on them. This means that any significant change to the implementation of a function which doesn't change its interface is likely to break white box tests which depended on the old function. The fragility of white box tests to change is the chief reason that black box tests are preferred.

> Ideally, you're able to write tests as you design your software interfaces, writing the code afterwards such that it fulfills the needs of the tests. This is the basis of [**Test-Driven Development**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test-driven_development)(TDD), which is a powerful means of creating high quality software. Tests written as part of a TDD process should inherently be black box tests, because the implementations they're testing don't exist yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ideally, you're able to write tests as you design your software interfaces, writing the code afterwards such that it fulfills the needs of the tests. This is the basis of [**Test-Driven Development**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test-driven_development) (TDD), which is a powerful means of creating high quality software. Tests written as part of a TDD process should inherently be black box tests, because the implementations they're testing don't exist yet.
```
